tvāmekadā gurumarutpuranātha voḍhuṃ
gāḍhādhirūḍhagarimāṇamapārayantī |
mātā nidhāya śayane kimidaṃ bateti
dhyāyantyaceṣṭata gṛheṣu niviṣṭaśaṅkā ||1||
tvām-ekadā	Thee, once,
gurumarutpuranātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
voḍhuṃ	to carry (Thee, who)
gāḍha-adhirūḍha-garimāṇam-	had very much increased in weight
apārayantī mātā	not being able (to carry), Thy mother (Yashoda)
nidhāya śayane	placing (Thee) on the bed
kim-idaṃ bata-iti	what is it indeed thus
dhyāyantī	thinking (of Thee)
aceṣṭata gṛheṣu	performed (her duties) in the house
niviṣṭa-śaṅkā	overcome with doubt
Once, O Lord of Guruvaayur! Thou who had very much increased in weight, Thy mother not being able to carry Thee, placed Thee on the bed. What indeed was the cause of this, thus overcome with misgivings, she kept busy carrying out her duties in the house. As she did so, she was constantly thinking of Thee and praying for Thy welfare.
tāvadvidūramupakarṇitaghoraghoṣa-
vyājṛmbhipāṃsupaṭalīparipūritāśa: |
vātyāvapussa kila daityavarastṛṇāva-
rtākhyo jahāra janamānasahāriṇaṃ tvām ||2||
tāvat-vidūram-	then at a distance
upakarṇita-ghora-ghoṣa-	was heard a terrific sound
vyājṛmbhi-pāṃsupaṭalī-	(with the) rising and spreading of a thick dust
paripūrita-āśa:	filling the quarters
vātyā-vapu:-sa	in the form of a whirl wind, he
kila daityavara:-	indeed, the famous Asura
tṛṇāvarta-ākhya:	Trinaavarta by name
jahāra	carried away (Thee)
janamānasa-hāriṇaṃ	of the peoples' mind carries away (the one who)
tvām	Thee
Then the well known Asura Trinaavarta, came disguised as a whirl wind. All the quarters were filled with thick dust and a terrific sound arose and spread all around by the impact of his arrival. He carried Thee away, who carries away the minds of people.
uddāmapāṃsutimirāhatadṛṣṭipāte
draṣṭuṃ kimapyakuśale paśupālaloke |
hā bālakasya kimiti tvadupāntamāptā
mātā bhavantamavilokya bhṛśaṃ ruroda ||3||
uddāma-pāṃsu-	intense dust (causing)
timira-āhata-	darkness and so obstructing
dṛṣṭi-pāte	the vision (when it was so)
draṣṭum kim-api-	to see anything at all
akuśale	unable
paśupāla-loke	(when) the cowherds were
hā bālakasya kim-	O what has happened to the child
iti	thus (worrying)
tvat-upāntam-āptā	near Thee approaching
mātā bhavantam-	Thy mother, Thee
avilokya	not seeing
bhṛśaṃ ruroda	loudly cried
The immense dust caused intense darkness due to which the vision was obstructed. All the cowherds and everyone were unable to see anything. Thy mother was full of worry as to what had happened to Thee. She ran in distress towards Thee and not finding Thee at the spot, she began to wail and cry loudly.
tāvat sa dānavavaro'pi ca dīnamūrti-
rbhāvatkabhāraparidhāraṇalūnavega: |
saṅkocamāpa tadanu kṣatapāṃsughoṣe
ghoṣe vyatāyata bhavajjananīnināda: ||4||
tāvat sa dānavavara:-	then the great demon
api ca dīnamūrti:-	also and weakened by
bhāvatka-bhāra-paridhāraṇa-	Thy weight (which he was) carrying
lūna-vega:	(because of which his) speed diminished
saṅkocam-āpa	(and he) got shrunk
tat-anu	thereafter
kṣata-pāṃsu-ghoṣe	subsided the dust and the noise
ghoṣe vyatāyata	in the cowherd village (Gokula) spread (was heard)
bhavat-jananī-ninād	Thy mother's cries
Then that great demon weakened in power, shrank in size and his speed was diminished because of carrying Thy weight. So the dust storm and the fierce whirling sound had also subsided, and so in the cowherd village Gokula, Thy mother's cries were clearly heard everywhere.
rodopakarṇanavaśādupagamya gehaṃ
krandatsu nandamukhagopakuleṣu dīna: |
tvāṃ dānavastvakhilamuktikaraṃ mumukṣu-
stvayyapramuñcati papāta viyatpradeśāt ||5||
roda-upakarṇana-vaśāt-	hearing the wailing and prompted by it
upagamya gehaṃ	reaching the house
krandatsu	crying
nanda-mukha-gopakuleṣu	(when) Nanda and other gopas and gopis
dīna:	weakened (the Asura)
tvām dānava:-tu	Thee, the Asura
akhila-muktikaram	(Thee) who releases all from bondage
mumukṣu:-	wanting to release
tvayi-apramuñcati	(when) Thou did not let go Thy hold
papāt	fell down
viyat-pradeśāt	from the skies
On hearing the wailings of Yashoda, Nanda and the other gopas rushed inside the house crying. Meanwhile, the Asura who had become weak by carrying Thy weight, wanted to release Thee, who releases everyone's bondages. But when Thou did no let go of Thy hold of him, he fell down from the skies.
rodākulāstadanu gopagaṇā bahiṣṭha-
pāṣāṇapṛṣṭhabhuvi dehamatisthaviṣṭham |
praikṣanta hanta nipatantamamuṣya vakṣa-
syakṣīṇameva ca bhavantamalaṃ hasantam ||6||
rodākulā:-tat-anu	wailing and exhausted, thereafter
gopagaṇā bahiṣṭha-	the gopas and gopikas, outside (the house)
pāṣāṇa-pṛṣṭha-bhuvi	on the rocky land's back (upon it)
deham-atisthaviṣṭham	the body, very huge and heavy
praikṣanta hanta	saw, what a wonder
nipatantam-	falling down
amuṣya vakṣasi-	on this (body's) chest
akṣīṇam-eva	absolutely unscathed
ca bhavantam	and Thee
alaṃ hasantam	slightly smiling (saw)
The gopas were exhausted by their crying and wailing. Then outside the house, they saw a huge and heavy body falling on the rock. What a wonder! On the chest of the dead body, they found Thee with a soft smile lying unscathed.
grāvaprapātaparipiṣṭagariṣṭhadeha-
bhraṣṭāsuduṣṭadanujopari dhṛṣṭahāsam |
āghnānamambujakareṇa bhavantametya
gopā dadhurgirivarādiva nīlaratnam ||7||
grāva-prapāta	(on) the rock (by) falling
paripiṣṭa-gariṣṭha-deha-	(being) smashed the huge bodied (Asura)
bhraṣṭāsu-duṣṭa-danuja-	(having) died the wicked demon,
upari dhṛṣṭa-hāsam	on it, wearing a smile (Thee)
āghnānam-	beating (about, with)
ambukareṇa	(Thy) lotus like hands
bhavantam-etya	Thee approaching
gopā: dadhu:-	the gopas picked up (Thee)
girivarāt-iva	like from a big mountain
nīlaratnam	a blue gem (is picked up)
The wicked demon had died by falling on the rock and his huge body was smashed. Wearing a smile Thou played on that dead body beating about with Thy lotus like hands. The gopas picked Thee up from there as one would pick a blue gem from a big mountain.
ekaikamāśu parigṛhya nikāmananda-
nnandādigopaparirabdhavicumbitāṅgam |
ādātukāmapariśaṅkitagopanārī-
hastāmbujaprapatitaṃ praṇumo bhavantam ||8||
eka-ekam-āśu	one by one quickly
parigṛhya	taking hold of
nikāma-nandan	very much rejoicing
nanda-ādi-gopa-	Nanda and other Gopaas
parirabdha-vicumbita-	embracing (and) kissing
aṅgam	the limbs
ādātu-kāma-	desiring to take (but)
pariśaṅkita-gopanārī-	hesitating (due to shyness) the Gopikaas
hasta-ambuja-	(in) the lotus like hands (of the Gopikaas)
prapatitam	(Thou) jumped into
praṇuma: bhavantam	(we) praise Thee
One by one, Nanda and the other Gopaas with great joy took hold of Thee quickly and embraced and kissed Thy limbs.The Gopikaas were also desirous of taking Thee, but did not do so out of shyness. We praise Thee, who then, as a honey beetle jumped into their lotus like hands.
bhūyo'pi kinnu kṛṇuma: praṇatārtihārī
govinda eva paripālayatāt sutaṃ na: |
ityādi mātarapitṛpramukhaistadānīṃ
samprārthitastvadavanāya vibho tvameva ||9||
bhūya:-api	again and again
kim-nu kṛṇuma:	what should we do'
praṇatārtihārī	The redeemer of the devotees
govinda eva	Govinda only
paripālayatāt	may protect
sutaṃ na:	our son
iti-ādi	thus etc.,
māta:-pitṛ-	by mother father
pramukhai:-tadānīm	and by others at that time
samprārthita:-	prayed
tvat-avanāya	(for) Thy protection
vibho tvam-eva	O Lord! To Thee only
Thy mother and father and the others wondered as to what could they do for Thy protection. Again and again, at that time, they said that only Govinda could protect their son. O Lord! The redeemer of Devotees! So they prayed to Thee alone for Thy welfare.
vātātmakaṃ danujamevamayi pradhūnvan
vātodbhavān mama gadān kimu no dhunoṣi |
kiṃ vā karomi punarapyanilālayeśa
niśśeṣarogaśamanaṃ muhurarthaye tvām ||10||
vātātmakaṃ danujam-	in the form of wind, the Asura
evam-ayi	thus O Thou!
pradhūnvan	having killed
vāta-udbhavān	arising from the winds
mama gadān	my ailments
kimu no dhunoṣi	why do you not kill (eradicate)
kiṃ vā karomi	what else can I do
puna:-api-	yet again
anilālayeśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
niśśeṣa-roga-śamanaṃ	for the eradication of all my ailments (internal and external)
muhu:-arthaye tvām	(I) again and again beseech Thee
Thus Thou killed the Asura who was in the form of the wind. Why do not Thou kill and remove my ailments which also arise from the wind. What else can I do? O Lord of Guruvaayur! I again and again beseech Thee for the eradication of all my internal and external ailments.